Adam. Where have you
been I joined the Air Force and it did
not go well terrible inner ear issues afraid of heights.
No I did not join the Air Force. I actually was promoting The Big
Short but I am happy to be back. Surprisingly awesome with you Rachel.
Adam Davidson our whole amazing team. I feel like I should give you the honors you should introduce our guest.
Our guest actually is from The Big Short He's our composer Nicholas
Britto was a concert pianist a degree in psychology from
Harvard who has also done music for twelve Years a Slave gimme the
loot and he wrote
this.
From gimlet media. This is surprisingly awesome. I'm Rachel
Ward and I am Adam McKay And joining us is Nick Britell
I am incredibly honored to be
here
and if we brought you here to help us understand this
very specific idea from music very new proposes a topic of
our episode because this concept is everywhere. It's a tool that composers
are always using because it evokes a very specific set of emotions in us and it can
help us
understand what exactly it is that you do for a living. It's called
The Circle
event
of the circle of fifths for me is this incredibly it's a very beautiful
core progression and hopefully by the end of the episode. It will be clear what it is how
it feels when you hear
it and also I think it's a cool lens through which we can understand a lot
of issues around music theory like starting with things like pitch and intervals and
chords and leading all the way through kind of how composers and songwriter.
Right music. So that's why the circle for this I think is pretty pretty amazing.
I actually had a horrible musical education. When I was in
school all I remember from my musical education was like
Ta-Ta T.T. ta rest rest and then like all college kids I
learned like five chords on a guitar and aggravated future girlfriends by
playing horribly on it
so I I come to this world having been betrayed by it but
I'm open minded we want to hear
a circle of fifths I think I think so we know what we're going for let's
hear the circle of death. OK here's a circle of
fifths Fly Me to them. Let me
play a monk
this let me see what spring
is
like a do gooder and me. OK And it's also
here.
You only
get
in
and apparently it is also here.
So
while I understand that we heard a circle at the end there. Yes I'm totally
incapable of identifying it that's OK That's OK so in order to understand this concept we're going to
I think we have to start at a very very basic
level
for me I think the most basic element to begin with is pitch. So I think by starting with an understanding like
what a note actually is we'll be able to sort of build up to the idea of
what what chords are and then eventually to what chord progressions
are can I confess something which is very embarrassing. Although I love music.
All I know. Pitch from really being honest is Randy Jackson on American
Idol tells people they're Pitchy all the time. Pitchy dogs dogs
it's awful job security concept that was a little pitchy dog. That's all I know pathetic.
I'm in there I'm forty
seven. Basically a pitch is
actually what your brain
perceives when it when it hears a
repeated vibration. That's regular in nature which is so I'll unpack that a little bit.
There are lots of things in nature that repeat. But repeat kind of slowly.
So let's imagine a propeller of an airplane for
a second or a natural phenomenon like a propeller on an airplane. So when you imagine
a propeller when it first starts up. It's
repeating not very quickly.
So
it sounds kind of like this you know mechanical whooshing
sound but what's interesting then I think everyone will recognize this happening
when you hear a propeller start spinning very quickly. You know as a plane might
be starting to take off. You haven't noticed that the sound of that starts changing and you start
hearing false with sounds like a drone
know
what the see there's starts to be like a drone note in there that you hear that doesn't sound the candle
it actually starts to sound like a sort of weird note and what's happening is that
basically once something starts repeating at a certain level
of speed. Your ear and your brain start perceiving this as a
note that if rhythm repeats rapid enough succession. Eventually it becomes a
note the threshold of of where we start hearing pitches usually around twenty hertz which is
Hertz is a unit inside. And that has to do with
frequency so how many times something happens how many cycles something happens per second. So twenty hertz
is twenty cycles twenty somethings per
second and what's interesting too is actually that the brain may have
something funny about that area of frequency because for
example it's approximate that same area
where frames in in film start looking
like fluid motion as
well so that's fascinating so that twenty twenty vibrations per
second threshold Yes really interesting so it isn't just
that seems to be where our mind orders things and looks
for commonalities and
structure that's the point where our brain sort of just get tired
more likable I don't know what music exactly. Yeah exactly. So your brain just summarizes a
lot it's like so much information your brain's like Oh actually
that's out now so Hertz is a measure of how many
times per second something vibrates and when we're hearing pitch our brains are
processing those
vibrations they're converting them into a note and what that note is
depends
on how many vibrations. We're
hearing there's thousands of all these different frequencies there's all these different ways of making
sound so one of the interesting things is that different cultures
have different frequencies that they have chosen as being
the ones that to some extent kind of matter to them for their music and
in Western music you know we have certain frequencies that we've kind of you know there's these
conventions we've agreed to we say OK this is that
frequency the most famous one is a which is defined
actually as four hundred forty Hertz zero four hundred forty vibrations of cycles a second.
This is a so we choose this frequency and we say
hey four hundred forty Hertz that pitch is is a which actually I can.
Play right here. So as
this. That say the air molecules here when I hit this. Are
you know vibrating at four hundred forty and a second. So that's what you
hear right so as four hundred forty.
Yes vibrations per second yes. What if he's got like four hundred forty one.
Yep totally totally so that would be you know there's a
certain range around notes
where the brain basically feels it's still the
A and that would be a little bit what what in music would call sharp.
So things that are a little bit higher than a
set frequency we say they're a little
sharp and things that are a little under a frequency we said we call them a
little flat in other
words pitchy dog.
So what. How do octaves fit into this. So if you're at four hundred
forty vibrations per second with a. Like what happens when you jump up an
octave
what's going on so basically when you double a frequency. It's what we would
call an octave with the way just so it's that simple it's
that simple so basically if A is four hundred
forty when you double the frequency of that you say OK I'd want to double that frequency
on here eight hundred eighty you hear.
OK to just be clear pretty much every human when they hear four hundred forty or
eight hundred eighty Hertz that frequency is going to sound like the same note. But what
they call it and what they consider a scale those those things
will vary across
cultures Exactly. OK so we understand pitch we understand the vibrations
relatively well. So now how are we. How are we bending towards this
magical circle of
fifths we're only doing one thing at a time exactly which is not how most
music sounds most music doesn't just do one of the time so the second no the second
note so we're going to start with the most basic one we already talked about to keep it simple
so what. If
we play the A and then we play the other
a one octave up at the same time. OK And Adam you already said that's an octave. So we
got an octave you're already playing what's called an interval.
That's two notes at once that's an octave.
Sounds really consonant really stable and an interval could be any two notes I
mean the notes and you know if I could
play. You know I could play.
I could do any of these these are all intervals you know all these things are intervals
and each interval is
related. It's just the ratio of these frequencies so this one we know is two to one.
So now what if we choose another radio yakitori it's that's today. So what you just played the octave
and octave two to one because because the frequency of this one is four hundred forty
her and the frequency of this
one hundred eighty her. So if you just take eight hundred eight by
foreigner forty
two doubled. I feel comfortable with that amount of totally that's that's as much as we will need. OK.
Just
double so and I'm just so let's keep it simple here.
What if I'm just going through a number out there what if I said I want to increase the ratio here I
want to take this and I want to increase the frequency by fifty percent that's all I want to
do as want to say what does the note sound like if I increase this fifty percent.
So that's the ratio of eighty three to two and that's actually how you
define it. It's basically
fifty percent more frequency is a fifth we call it. This is that in the name
in music theory give is called a perfect fifth.
So this feels like a lot of math for me to have to manage in
this setting but it sounds like what you're saying is that the relationships between the
notes in an interval that relationship can be summarized
mathematically and our brains tend to like it better. They like
the sound better with that math is actually pretty simple.
In western music we've chosen certain very simple relationships
between frequencies and the fifth is this one so that's
a to see and that's an interval because it's to
douse two notes it's an interval certain types of intervals. You
know tend to feel certain degrees of stable
or
unstable and this is to some extent due to culture you know maybe the numbers are just
easy for our brain to process relationships. So if I do this for a second.
I feel a little bit a little different right. I mean my response that was like that got darker
Galad Arguello
different the fifth is like
a reveal in a
movie like The Turns out the wife is alive. And
she steps in the door with the fifth the second one feels like she's not
alive and that guy's going to commit suicide. That's interesting you say that
because
the second one. This is
a very famous interval called the tri
tone and in fact in the Middle Ages. It was
referred to as Diablo lists in music which is the devil
in music this ratio and was forbidden false and was actually
forbidden to be used. You
know in certain contexts and it wasn't really until like around the seventeen hundreds
that people started using it and the tried of the funny thing with the tragedy is that it's actually
not you know
it's on its own it sounds less Let's imagine less potentially
a stable than the faith. But when you use it in a context of other types of music.
It's great and actually can be used in so many different ways so for example
just to show where the try tone is very clear the beginning of this theme song
as the Triton were almost right away.
So
that's a track down the. Is that the tried to own in
the sixteen hundreds you would've gone to jail forever and every burned at the stake for
that that for the tribe down. So even in The Simpsons that we just heard you know it starts the tri tone but
right away goes to fast so
it's you know that right away it's actually And funny enough
to try to turn there is almost
like the step to getting to the perfect which is the resolution of that.
Let's call it dissonance you know which is similar in like Bernstein's Maria. You
know
that
right there you go you have you have the dry tone and then it goes right
away you know.
Oh oh.
Annette
what would happen if you did a trike shown at the beginning of our national anthem. Like if
you added a try Joan that resolved with the fifth.
What would it sound if we do it where it actually if we start out it would be something like
this
or over or O.B.
this would be interesting
study Civil War
what happened forty years earlier you tell us there are a bunch of
these intervals these sequences of notes and they've all got these like funny names but the one that we're
really focusing on is the perfect fifth this one it's like this what is the building block
of what we're talking about today of the circle of fifths
and from what I understand what makes a fit the fit is basically the relationship between the
notes in the inner Well basically in the scale. If we're thinking about like a piano they're
just five keys away from each other one two three four five perfect.
I like to think in a way if you think of like composing as sort of this you know like a
chef mixing all these different intervals and core. And rhythms and pitches together
different intervals to me have different almost like flavors. You know.
So we're getting interval. Yes we're getting two notes at a time you know for the time so.
So now it feels like we're on the threshold of chords right we
are right on the threshold of chords we are we are exactly there and
if
we Rachel there's no way I'm ready for this can we take a break I'm going
to go take a shower. Have a cup of tea.
Take a walk around the neighborhood and then we do
this I think that sounds
fair
this episode of surprisingly awesome is brought to you by Ford Motor Company where engineer
modern Hammoud live by the following words of wisdom.
What would the fusion energy
do the fusion energy as Ford's plug in hybrid vehicle and when Martin started working on
these cars that are designed to help maximize driving. Efficiency. It changed the way
he lived his life outside of work. So what would the fusion energy do with the
heat generated during
breaking it's repurposing it and using it as electricity to propel the vehicle.
So I started collecting the food that we would otherwise throw away and turning
it
into compost the fusion energy did not just inspire Mohsen to compost it
also completely changed his family's morning pancake routine W W
S E
T What with the fusion energy do when it came
to the trees on our property. We had some big maple trees and
we love bank X. we buy a lot of maple syrup to look at that
look for the future the energy do a block like tap into the trees and see if I can
collect some sap make my own maple syrup and I did it
before where engineering isn't just about driving better. It's about living
better go to ford dot com awesome to learn
more this episode is surprisingly awesome is brought to you by. Squarespace
the easiest way to build a beautiful website portfolio or online store.
So we have the thought that we should create a square Space page just about Adam
Davidson a love it. What should we put on
it I think we should call it. Adam Davidson big meaty head
and it should be a close up of Adam
Davidson face across the full screen and then all the
entrances to the site are all like through David's right eye left eye
mouth and then you go to the other parts of the space. There are also super close ups
of Adam Davidson face.
So the Web site it would be like endless Davidson. But I like that title too that's good
and it could be like one of those like really annoying old school websites where has like a song playing as soon as you
get there totally
like Adam Davidson Adam
Davidson just on an endless loop so horrified by
this square space for the atoms in your life and for
the rest of us start your free trial site today at square space dot com and make sure he's the offer
code awesome to get ten percent off your first purchase Squarespace build
a beautiful.
Adam
Davidson Adam
Davidson
and I'm back. I've just taken a shower. I've had some cameo P.C. I read a little bit
of Kilgour bronze the profits. I feel very centered. Let's do
it it's going to court.
All right from gimlet media this is surprisingly often I'm Rachel
Ward and I am at a McKay And we're joined by Nicholas Britto and
we're talking about the circle of
fifths and so we have been made to understand that a
note and pitch and a frequency are all pretty much the
same thing pretty much. So we're going to use all those words pretty interchangeable
Absolutely. Another idea that's on the table here is the idea of an interval just two notes
played at the same time. Exactly and a type of interval
is a fifth
a fifth is a type of an interval Exactly so it's it's when you go from one note and
you go up. Five notes. So you
go if you're on the first first note here you can say. So this is if we define the first
one the second note is to going up the scale three or
four fifths that's how we
would counted in music theory. OK where do we go from here. OK So
we have these different types of intervals and interval again we're saying is basically.
Two notes at once so chords are when we
add more notes so it could be three or more notes you get chords before
that when you're dealing with intervals or just talking
like the sort of flavor of of intervals isn't quite as complex let's say as
the flavors that you can get when you have full chords. You know you can really cook all
this crazy stuff once you have these three no
chords. And just to make it very very clear when we talk about chords. We always talk about
the chord based on that first note. So that means that there's more than one a chord right.
So and a chord is basically any notes you stack on top of an
A here. That's a
major a minor you could have a
dominant seventh.
That was that was my and it came when I played basketball and college I was I was
a dominant seven I heard that that's yeah. Can you can both us some walk on music for him real
quick with using his nickname.
Ladies and gentlemen from the University of Kentucky our
forward dominance.
MCCANN
That's your weirdest basketball nickname ever so you're saying a dominant seven years in
a minor you're saying. A
major is it always the note on the gold last of the cord is the
one defining
it absolutely the the for the lowest note generally is what we would call it. You
know the bass note on the chord the people have different terms for people called the bass
no people called the root. People call the fundamental all the different terminology basically when
you're when you're thinking about chords and harmony. The simplest most
most fundamental way of thinking about it is that it's the bass note that kind of determines a lot
of Western harmony and that's why when you think about
in you know in a band or the bassist is such a crucial all
crucial
thing because the bass is actually what's going to help you kind of know what chord you're on at any
given time. It's almost more B.S. than
B.S.S. it's a great way to think about and like a home play bass like the bassist the
basic Yeah
right so we're in the realm of chords is exactly. A
vague caveman like knowledge of chords
now is a chord progressions or just when you play. More than you know two or
more chords in a row you get a chord progression. Just like the sort of parade of
chords So for example there are these very famous and very often
used chord progressions in Western music. We were talking about
five one like the perfect fit you know going from
a five to
one. If you build the chords on top of the as
notes you then get that thing called the authentic and the five one progression
which is this so
basically So here's five. And here's one.
So you hear that
sound very common sound it feels very like
your and almost at like the ending of something you
like and are done. You know this
is
and then another one. Actually here's one called ball play this and you. You think
so we're very used to
this Bible on what if I
go
oh that's called deceptive. That's called deceptive. I
like that a set of current exegesis applications because your brain cannot you know like
on here but actually we're like we're going there.
So
now we understand that this is the core progression. It's just one
chord after another. So this feels like now we are poised to understand the circle of fifths Yes exactly.
So we have arrived we have
arrived at the Circle of Fifths I
feel like I'm in seventh grade and I'm playing Dungeons and Dragons again.
And we've just gone through a great adventure a module is used to call them and we are
finally we have arrived at the Stony
gates of the circle of fifths Nick Britell as our Dungeon Master
please lead us in just exactly so. So exactly
so we're simplifying this a little bit but essentially a circus is this
very common type of corporate action. Let's imagine instead of just these
two note chord progressions like going from the
five to the one where the bass note goes from the fifth note scale to the
first you know.
What if Actually we keep going and we play more chords
after that and what if every chord that we played was just this
sequence related by moving the bass note a fifth.
OK OK So this you're going to play something that's basically just adding five. I'm
just I'm basically moving the bass note by a
fifth each time. So if you take the bass
note we start on C. and I go hear you hear the sound so this is the bass going down
if you see these things can move by
men or if I go up I
go see those are just fifths right. And I'm actually in the room with
Nick playing the keyboard and I can see. That on the keyboard. Yes just
counting exactly
we're just we're just we're five down the road. We're just moving these things
biasness So if I do that and then I just
put chords that we're doing just build basic chords on top of each one of those you
get this
sound
and you see so you get this thing called a chord
progression
and you can do it in different types of tonalities that's like the major circle if it's you could do a
minor one.
OK
So it's I see how that is more complicated. We had earlier we had that like a Beethoven
E. cadence that sort of like and it's the end of something and then we
have that deceptive cadence that was a kind of like a fake out and then this
one is just a lot more there's
a lot more to it because it's not just one chord to another chord. It's one chord to another
chord to another chord it's a series of chords that follows a pattern.
So this one's interesting because basically the bass notes when you do a circle of fifths you hit
every every basic chord of the scale in the process of going through
it so in a cool way it's this kind of summary of the chords of a
scale and you know to use that number terminology using where you start in like
one and you're back at one and that's
the reason
to go because it actually it's like this weird identity of the scale.
You know and it has this type of sound that in a weird way because you're kind of coming
back to the one at the end but you're going through this interesting journey of the chords.
I think different people feel differently about the progression but I tend to have this almost kind of nostalgia.
Wistful feeling so here's here's a circle
fest.
Sunny. It has. It a little bit feels
like graduating sixth grade. Yet it's got a
little bit a groove Enos to it exactly. It's got it's got a little bit of life to it
so it is like I sort of have a
similar feeling of like the style just. Yet it's dynamic at the same time
like a dynamic nostalgia exactly what it feels like let me be a real eye as it
once again a tone deaf nonmusical person. How is that in Fly Me To
The Moon. I still can't quite hear it so here's the thing so this is where it's cool so.
So in Fly Me To The Moon. It's actually doing that exact thing. Fly Me To
The Moon is in a
mind when you hear the melody. So the melody
is
right. So if you look at our bass notes. It's exactly doing the circle watch so the bass note
yeah OK. Yes So I'm watching him play this and I can see that his left
hand the hand playing the bass line is sort of like climbing up and down the
keyboard so basically
the left hand is a pattern and then just are circle sets and so
that's
if you just look at the bass note you see the whole thing.
Can you play us another example I think we heard
we you've actually prepared something for us yet shows us
how how truly similar.
Yes lots of music is so another another very famous piece that happens
to use the circle of fifths is the song I Will Survive. So here's a quick
example of
that
but then I
didn't make
any.
So so that is a circle fest basically where it's the same and actually it's even in the same key
as the family of the moon example where
I
see the blood and it's just doing the same
exact thing again it's the base the base. That it arriving this and you're just building chords on top of
that progression using that aggression and so this was something that actually I discovered over the weekend.
If you take the Fly Me To The Moon audio
file and you mash it up wiv I will survive the
bizarre thing is they actually fit on top of each other perfectly which is kind of crazy
and shows that they're really using the same harmonies. So this is and this is something that people can mash
up culture this is why a lot of this stuff exists so I'll play this example and you'll see that they literally are the
same
there
and then here's a piece by Mozart that does the same thing.
They're
all
the same basic credible. It's totally incredible.
So all
of these that it's really cool deejays are really just scammers they're just exploiting a
fundamental component of music here because look I
mean do you sit down. Do you say to yourself. Like I think this is a moment where I'd like to
deploy a fifth. Mike do you actually like sort of had that internal conversation.
Yeah absolutely.
There's It depends you know if I'm especially when with writing film music where you're
really trying to think about things that are happening dramatically in
a film and you're trying to. I gin the way that your music can emotionally relate to those things.
Yeah absolutely there's a sort of you know there's like a tool kit in the vocabulary of different types
of chords and different things
and you know you have everything from you know these are you know different types of chords
feel like different things so minor chords have their sort of feel and you know
most augmented chords have this kind of kind of bill and major chords of that sort of feel you know.
So everything has its own feeling and composing is that fun experimentation and search for
different types of emotional
journeys and so the circle of fifths is kind of like a tool in your toolkit as a
composer sure I love the service and in fact as as
we realize recently. There is a there is a partial circle fits in the
surprisingly awesome new music.
So
basically
I do a little circle with a sequence inside and that gives this that same kind of
feeling where you're cycling through these different things but then coming home and that's
really cool man. I once
again whenever we do the show I always just feel like why didn't someone tell me
this in third grade.
This is been amazing my mind is officially done I'm going to be looking for the circle if it's everywhere. I'm going
to become a circle of fifths detective amazing.
Surprisingly awesome theme song is obviously by Nicholas to sell our add music and five build
buildings were edited this week by Alex Blumberg and the roast roster were produced by me.
Rachel Ward and Co Leila
Holt that makes the show brother and Willie and Eric metals about a production assistant. Special thanks
to
magicka and a huge thanks to Nick Britto if you want to hear more from him the soundtrack you did for The
Big Short is on i Tunes and it's
incredible and we've got something new that you might really like every week we have to leave.
Weird facts on the cutting room floor and we find it very wasteful. So now we're doing a newsletter every
episode we're going to send out more stuff so if you want in on that had to him let me be a
dot
com slash and look at the sign up box that said on the lower right hand side of the screen
gimlet Media dot com plus possum.
If you're enjoying surprisingly awesome.
You should rate and review it on i Tunes. That's the number one way you could help more people discover
the show and you can tweet us at surprising show e-mail us at surprisingly awesome and gimlet
Media dot com We're out on Facebook our website is gimlet Media dot com slash awesome and
our Tumblr is true shark attack stories dot tumblr dot
com surprisingly awesome is a production of gimlet media.
Thanks to our sponsors Squarespace the easiest way to create a beautiful website portfolio or
online store when you decide to sign up for Squarespace make sure to use the offer code
awesome to get ten percent off your first purchase and to show your support for our
show Squarespace build a beautiful.
Thanks to our sponsor Ford Motor Company where Ford engineers bring new and
innovative ideas to life every day go to four dot com slash
awesome to learn
more and are
done.